<!-- SEG:m00034:title:auto-1 -->
Alkyl Groups

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00001 -->
If you imagine removing a hydrogen atom from an alkane, the partial structure that remains is called an {{term}}alkyl group{{/term}}. Alkyl groups are not stable compounds themselves, they are simply parts of larger compounds and are named by replacing the -[[i:ane]] ending of the parent alkane with an -[[i:yl]] ending. For example, removal of a hydrogen from methane, CH[[sub:4]], generates a methyl group, –CH[[sub:3]], and removal of a hydrogen from ethane, CH[[sub:3]]CH[[sub:3]], generates an ethyl group, –CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]. Similarly, removal of a hydrogen atom from the end carbon of any straight-chain alkane gives the series of straight-chain alkyl groups shown in [[xref:table-00001]]. Combining an alkyl group with any of the functional groups listed earlier makes it possible to generate and name many thousands of compounds. For example:

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-3 -->
Alkane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-4 -->
Name

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-5 -->
Alkyl group

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-6 -->
Name (abbreviation)

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-7 -->
CH[[sub:4]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-8 -->
Methane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-9 -->
–CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-10 -->
Methyl (Me)

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-11 -->
CH[[sub:3]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-12 -->
Ethane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-13 -->
–CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-14 -->
Ethyl (Et)

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-15 -->
CH[[sub:3]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-16 -->
Propane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-17 -->
–CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-18 -->
Propyl (Pr)

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-19 -->
CH[[sub:3]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-20 -->
Butane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-21 -->
–CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-22 -->
Butyl (Bu)

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-23 -->
CH[[sub:3]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-24 -->
Pentane

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-25 -->
–CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:3]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:entry:auto-26 -->
Pentyl, or amyl

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00002 -->
Just as straight-chain alkyl groups are generated by removing a hydrogen from an end carbon, branched alkyl groups are generated by removing a hydrogen atom from an internal carbon. Two 3-carbon alkyl groups and four 4-carbon alkyl groups are possible ([[xref:fig-00002]]).

<!-- SEG:m00034:caption:fig-00002-caption -->
[[b:Alkyl groups generated from straight-chain alkanes.]]

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00003 -->
One further comment about naming alkyl groups: the prefixes [[i:sec]]- (for secondary) and [[i:tert]]- (for tertiary) used for the C[[sub:4]] alkyl groups in [[xref:fig-00002]] refer to the number of other carbon atoms attached to the branching carbon atom. There are four possibilities: primary (1°), secondary (2°), tertiary (3°), and quaternary (4°).

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00004 -->
The symbol {{term}}R{{/term}} is used here and throughout organic chemistry to represent a generalized organic group. The R group can be methyl, ethyl, propyl, or any of a multitude of others. You might think of [[b:R]] as representing the [[b:R]]est of the molecule, which isn’t specified.

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00005 -->
The terms [[i:primary, secondary, tertiary,]] and [[i:quaternary]] are routinely used in organic chemistry, and their meanings need to become second nature. For example, if we were to say, “Citric acid is a tertiary alcohol,” we would mean that it has an alcohol functional group (–OH) bonded to a carbon atom that is itself bonded to three other carbons.

<!-- SEG:m00034:para:para-00006 -->
In addition to speaking of carbon atoms as being primary, secondary, or tertiary, we speak of hydrogens in the same way. Primary hydrogen atoms are attached to primary carbons (RCH[[sub:3]]), secondary hydrogens are attached to secondary carbons (R[[sub:2]]CH[[sub:2]]), and tertiary hydrogens are attached to tertiary carbons (R[[sub:3]]CH). There is, however, no such thing as a quaternary hydrogen. (Why not?)

<!-- SEG:m00034:title:sect-00001-title -->
Problems
