---
title: "Galvanic Cells"
module: "m68822"
lang: "en"
---

# Galvanic Cells

## Cell Notation

Abbreviated symbolism is commonly used to represent a galvanic cell by providing essential information on its composition and structure. These symbolic representations are called **cell notations**{#term-00007} or **cell schematics**{#term-00008}, and they are written following a few guidelines:

A verbal description of the cell as viewed from anode-to-cathode is often a useful first-step in writing its schematic. For example, the galvanic cell shown in [↗](#CNX_Chem_17_02_Galvanicel) consists of a solid copper anode immersed in an aqueous solution of copper(II) nitrate that is connected via a salt bridge to an aqueous silver(I) nitrate solution, immersed in which is a solid silver cathode. Converting this statement to symbolism following the above guidelines results in the cell schematic:

Consider a different galvanic cell (see [↗](#CNX_Chem_17_02_Oxidareduc)) based on the spontaneous reaction between solid magnesium and aqueous iron(III) ions:

In this cell, a solid magnesium anode is immersed in an aqueous solution of magnesium chloride that is connected via a salt bridge to an aqueous solution containing a mixture of iron(III) chloride and iron(II) chloride, immersed in which is a platinum cathode. The cell schematic is then written as

Notice the cathode half-cell is different from the others considered thus far in that its electrode is comprised of a substance (Pt) that is neither a reactant nor a product of the cell reaction. This is required when neither member of the half-cell’s redox couple can reasonably function as an electrode, which must be electrically conductive and in a phase separate from the half-cell solution. In this case, both members of the redox couple are solute species, and so Pt is used as an **inert electrode**{#term-00009} that can simply provide or accept electrons to redox species in solution. Electrodes constructed from a member of the redox couple, such as the Mg anode in this cell, are called **active electrodes**{#term-00010}.

- The relevant components of each half-cell are represented by their chemical formulas or element symbols
- All interfaces between component phases are represented by vertical parallel lines; if two or more components are present in the same phase, their formulas are separated by commas
- By convention, the schematic begins with the anode and proceeds left-to-right identifying phases and interfaces encountered within the cell, ending with the cathode

:::note
### Answer:

[[EQ:10]]

:::

::: example
### Writing Galvanic Cell Schematics

Writing Galvanic Cell Schematics A galvanic cell is fabricated by connecting two half-cells with a salt bridge, one in which a chromium wire is immersed in a 1 M CrCl~3~ solution and another in which a copper wire is immersed in 1 M CuCl~2~. Assuming the chromium wire functions as an anode, write the schematic for this cell along with equations for the anode half-reaction, the cathode half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction.

Solution Since the chromium wire is stipulated to be the anode, the schematic begins with it and proceeds left-to-right, symbolizing the other cell components until ending with the copper wire cathode:

The half-reactions for this cell are

Multiplying to make the number of electrons lost by Cr and gained by Cu^2+^ equal yields

Adding the half-reaction equations and simplifying yields an equation for the cell reaction:

Check Your Learning Omitting solute concentrations and spectator ion identities, write the schematic for a galvanic cell whose net cell reaction is shown below.

[[EQ:10]]

:::

*Figure: A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between magnesium and iron(III) ions.*{#CNX_Chem_17_02_Oxidareduc}

## Key Concepts and Summary

Galvanic cells are devices in which a spontaneous redox reaction occurs indirectly, with the oxidant and reductant redox couples contained in separate half-cells. Electrons are transferred from the reductant (in the anode half-cell) to the oxidant (in the cathode half-cell) through an external circuit, and inert solution phase ions are transferred between half-cells, through a salt bridge, to maintain charge neutrality. The construction and composition of a galvanic cell may be succinctly represented using chemical formulas and others symbols in the form of a cell schematic (cell notation).

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm154595184}
Write cell schematics for the following cell reactions, using platinum as an inert electrode as needed.

(a) [[EQ:11]]

(b) [[EQ:12]]

(c) [[EQ:13]]

(d) [[EQ:14]]

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:15]] (b) [[EQ:16]] (c) [[EQ:17]] (d) [[EQ:18]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm104280704}
Assuming the schematics below represent galvanic cells as written, identify the half-cell reactions occurring in each.

(a) [[EQ:19]]

(b) [[EQ:20]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm144742192}
Write a balanced equation for the cell reaction of each cell in the previous exercise.

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:21]] (b) [[EQ:22]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm218235136}
Balance each reaction below, and write a cell schematic representing the reaction as it would occur in a galvanic cell.

(a) [[EQ:23]]

(b) [[EQ:24]]

(c) [[EQ:25]]

(d) [[EQ:26]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm20230112}
Identify the oxidant and reductant in each reaction of the previous exercise.

:::answer
Species oxidized = reducing agent: (a) Al(**s**); (b) NO(**g**); (c) Mg(**s**); and (d) MnO~2~(**s**); Species reduced = oxidizing agent: (a) Zr^4+^(**aq**); (b) Ag^+^(**aq**); (c) [[EQ:27]]; and (d) [[EQ:28]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp19248144}
From the information provided, use cell notation to describe the following systems:

(a) In one half-cell, a solution of Pt(NO~3~)~2~ forms Pt metal, while in the other half-cell, Cu metal goes into a Cu(NO~3~)~2~ solution with all solute concentrations 1 **M**.

(b) The cathode consists of a gold electrode in a 0.55 **M** Au(NO~3~)~3~ solution and the anode is a magnesium electrode in 0.75 **M** Mg(NO~3~)~2~ solution.

(c) One half-cell consists of a silver electrode in a 1 **M** AgNO~3~ solution, and in the other half-cell, a copper electrode in 1 **M** Cu(NO~3~)~2~ is oxidized.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm117307760}
Why is a salt bridge necessary in galvanic cells like the one in [↗](#CNX_Chem_17_02_Galvanicel)?

:::answer
Without the salt bridge, the circuit would be open (or broken) and no current could flow. With a salt bridge, each half-cell remains electrically neutral and current can flow through the circuit.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm144354208}
An active (metal) electrode was found to gain mass as the oxidation-reduction reaction was allowed to proceed. Was the electrode an anode or a cathode? Explain.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp44043568}
An active (metal) electrode was found to lose mass as the oxidation-reduction reaction was allowed to proceed. Was the electrode an anode or a cathode? Explain.

:::answer
Active electrodes participate in the oxidation-reduction reaction. Since metals form cations, the electrode would lose mass if metal atoms in the electrode were to oxidize and go into solution. Oxidation occurs at the anode.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm33124048}
The masses of three electrodes (A, B, and C), each from three different galvanic cells, were measured before and after the cells were allowed to pass current for a while. The mass of electrode A increased, that of electrode B was unchanged, and that of electrode C decreased. Identify each electrode as active or inert, and note (if possible) whether it functioned as anode or cathode.

:::

As demonstration of spontaneous chemical change, [↗](#CNX_Chem_17_02_CuAg) shows the result of immersing a coiled wire of copper into an aqueous solution of silver nitrate. A gradual but visually impressive change spontaneously occurs as the initially colorless solution becomes increasingly blue, and the initially smooth copper wire becomes covered with a porous gray solid.

These observations are consistent with (i) the oxidation of elemental copper to yield copper(II) ions, Cu^2+^**(aq)**, which impart a blue color to the solution, and (ii) the reduction of silver(I) ions to yield elemental silver, which deposits as a fluffy solid on the copper wire surface. And so, **the direct transfer of electrons from the copper wire to the aqueous silver ions is spontaneous** under the employed conditions. A summary of this redox system is provided by these equations:

Consider the construction of a device that contains all the reactants and products of a redox system like the one here, but prevents physical contact between the reactants. Direct transfer of electrons is, therefore, prevented; transfer, instead, takes place indirectly through an external circuit that contacts the separated reactants. Devices of this sort are generally referred to as **electrochemical cells**, and those in which a spontaneous redox reaction takes place are called **galvanic cells**{#term-00001} (or **voltaic cells**{#term-00002}).

A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between copper and silver(I) is depicted in [↗](#CNX_Chem_17_02_Galvanicel). The cell is comprised of two **half-cells**{#term-00003}, each containing the redox conjugate pair (“couple”) of a single reactant. The half-cell shown at the left contains the Cu(0)/Cu(II) couple in the form of a solid copper foil and an aqueous solution of copper nitrate. The right half-cell contains the Ag(I)/Ag(0) couple as solid silver foil and an aqueous silver nitrate solution. An external circuit is connected to each half-cell at its solid foil, meaning the Cu and Ag foil each function as an **electrode**. By definition, the **anode**{#term-00004} of an electrochemical cell is the electrode at which oxidation occurs (in this case, the Cu foil) and the **cathode**{#term-00005} is the electrode where reduction occurs (the Ag foil). The redox reactions in a galvanic cell occur only at the interface between each half-cell’s reaction mixture and its electrode. To keep the reactants separate while maintaining charge-balance, the two half-cell solutions are connected by a tube filled with inert electrolyte solution called a **salt bridge**{#term-00006}. The spontaneous reaction in this cell produces Cu^2+^ cations in the anode half-cell and consumes Ag^+^ ions in the cathode half-cell, resulting in a compensatory flow of inert ions from the salt bridge that maintains charge balance. Increasing concentrations of Cu^2+^ in the anode half-cell are balanced by an influx of NO~3~^−^ from the salt bridge, while a flow of Na^+^ into the cathode half-cell compensates for the decreasing Ag^+^ concentration.
