## titill: „Calorimetry" kafli: „5.2" eining: „m68726" tungumál: „en" hluti: „d"

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idm11354032 number=14}
The addition of 3.15 g of Ba(OH)~2~·8H~2~O to a solution of 1.52 g of NH~4~SCN in 100 g of water in a calorimeter caused the temperature to fall by 3.1 °C. Assuming the specific heat of the solution and products is 4.20 J/g °C, calculate the approximate amount of heat absorbed by the reaction, which can be represented by the following equation:

Ba(OH)~2~·8H~2~O(*s*) + 2NH~4~SCN(*aq*) ⟶ Ba(SCN)~2~(*aq*) + 2NH~3~(*aq*) + 10H~2~O(*l*)

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
1.4 kJ

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp3696624 number=15}
The reaction of 50 mL of acid and 50 mL of base described in [Example 5.5](#fs-idm19242032) increased the temperature of the solution by 6.9 ºC. How much would the temperature have increased if 100 mL of acid and 100 mL of base had been used in the same calorimeter starting at the same temperature of 22.0 ºC? Explain your answer.

:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp22524928 number=16}
If the 3.21 g of NH~4~NO~3~ in [Example 5.6](#fs-idp325184) were dissolved in 100.0 g of water under the same conditions, how much would the temperature change? Explain your answer.

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
22.6. Since the mass and the heat capacity of the solution is approximately equal to that of the water, the two-fold increase in the amount of water leads to a two-fold decrease of the temperature change.

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp17899648 number=17}
When 1.0 g of fructose, C~6~H~12~O~6~(*s*), a sugar commonly found in fruits, is burned in oxygen in a bomb calorimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter increases by 1.58 °C. If the heat capacity of the calorimeter and its contents is 9.90 kJ/°C, what is *q* for this combustion?

:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp40934400 number=18}
When a 0.740-g sample of trinitrotoluene (TNT), C~7~H~5~N~2~O~6~, is burned in a bomb calorimeter, the temperature increases from 23.4 °C to 26.9 °C. The heat capacity of the calorimeter is 534 J/°C, and it contains 675 mL of water. How much heat was produced by the combustion of the TNT sample?

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
11.7 kJ

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp26469408 number=19}
One method of generating electricity is by burning coal to heat water, which produces steam that drives an electric generator. To determine the rate at which coal is to be fed into the burner in this type of plant, the heat of combustion per ton of coal must be determined using a bomb calorimeter. When 1.00 g of coal is burned in a bomb calorimeter ([Figure 5.11](#CNX_Chem_05_02_BombCalor)), the temperature increases by 1.48 °C. If the heat capacity of the calorimeter is 21.6 kJ/°C, determine the heat produced by combustion of a ton of coal (2.000 [[EQ:29]] 10^3^ pounds).

:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp11692560 number=20}
The amount of fat recommended for someone with a daily diet of 2000 Calories is 65 g. What percent of the calories in this diet would be supplied by this amount of fat if the average number of Calories for fat is9.1 Calories/g?

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
30%

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp47280960 number=21}
A teaspoon of the carbohydrate sucrose (common sugar) contains 16 Calories (16 kcal). What is the mass of one teaspoon of sucrose if the average number of Calories for carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g?

:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp47067840 number=22}
What is the maximum mass of carbohydrate in a 6-oz serving of diet soda that contains less than 1 Calorie per can if the average number of Calories for carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g?

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
0.24 g

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idm30519744 number=23}
A pint of premium ice cream can contain 1100 Calories. What mass of fat, in grams and pounds, must be produced in the body to store an extra 1.1 [[EQ:30]] 10^3^ Calories if the average number of Calories for fat is9.1 Calories/g?

:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp1428384 number=24}
A serving of a breakfast cereal contains 3 g of protein, 18 g of carbohydrates, and 6 g of fat. What is the Calorie content of a serving of this cereal if the average number of Calories for fat is 9.1 Calories/g, for carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g, and for protein is 4.1 Calories/g?

:::[[DIRECTIVE:answer]]
1.4 [[EQ:31]] 10^2^ Calories

:::
:::

:::[[DIRECTIVE:exercise]]{#fs-idp47244464 number=25}
Which is the least expensive source of energy in kilojoules per dollar: a box of breakfast cereal that weighs 32 ounces and costs $4.23, or a liter of isooctane (density, 0.6919 g/mL) that costs $0.45? Compare the nutritional value of the cereal with the heat produced by combustion of the isooctane under standard conditions. A 1.0-ounce serving of the cereal provides 130 Calories.

:::