## titill: „Unknown" kafli: „unknown" eining: „unknown" tungumál: „en" hluti: „c"

*(i)* [[EQ:108]]

Use the reactions here to determine the Δ*H*° for reaction *(i)*:

*(ii)* [[EQ:109]]

*(iii)* [[EQ:110]]

*(iv)* [[EQ:111]]

*(v)* [[EQ:112]]

−1407 kJ

:::

:::example{id="fs-idp120730208"}
### Example 5.15: Using Hess’s Law

What is the standard enthalpy change for the reaction:

[[EQ:50]]{id="fs-idp134549904"}

**Solution: Using the Equation**

Use the special form of Hess’s law given previously, and values from [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}:

[[EQ:51]]{id="fs-idp146127936"}

[[EQ:52]]{id="fs-idp146140160"}

**Solution: Supporting Why the General Equation Is Valid**

Alternatively, we can write this reaction as the sum of the decompositions of 3NO~2~(*g*) and 1H~2~O(*l*) into their constituent elements, and the formation of 2HNO~3~(*aq*) and 1NO(*g*) from their constituent elements. Writing out these reactions, and noting their relationships to the [[EQ:113]] values for these compounds (from [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"} ), we have:

[[EQ:53]]{id="fs-idp134571776"}

[[EQ:54]]{id="fs-idp168099120"}

[[EQ:55]]{id="fs-idp168119776"}

[[EQ:56]]{id="fs-idp194526576"}

Summing these reaction equations gives the reaction we are interested in:

[[EQ:57]]{id="fs-idp155650448"}

Summing their enthalpy changes gives the value we want to determine:

[[EQ:58]]{id="fs-idp155662864"}

So the standard enthalpy change for this reaction is Δ*H*° = −138.4 kJ.

Note that this result was obtained by (1) multiplying the [[EQ:114]] of each product by its stoichiometric coefficient and summing those values, (2) multiplying the [[EQ:115]] of each reactant by its stoichiometric coefficient and summing those values, and then (3) subtracting the result found in (2) from the result found in (1). This is also the procedure in using the general equation, as shown.

**Check Your Learning**

Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of ethanol, C~2~H~5~OH(*l*), when H~2~O(*l*) and CO~2~(*g*) are formed. Use the following enthalpies of formation: C~2~H~5~OH(*l*), −278 kJ/mol; H~2~O(*l*), −286 kJ/mol; and CO~2~(*g*), −394 kJ/mol.

−1368 kJ/mol

:::

## Key Concepts and Summary

If a chemical change is carried out at constant pressure and the only work done is caused by expansion or contraction, *q* for the change is called the enthalpy change with the symbol Δ*H*, or [[EQ:116]] for reactions occurring under standard state conditions at 298 K. The value of Δ*H* for a reaction in one direction is equal in magnitude, but opposite in sign, to Δ*H* for the reaction in the opposite direction, and Δ*H* is directly proportional to the quantity of reactants and products. The standard enthalpy of formation, [[EQ:117]] is the enthalpy change accompanying the formation of 1 mole of a substance from the elements in their most stable states at 1 bar and 298.15 K. If the enthalpies of formation are available for the reactants and products of a reaction, the enthalpy change can be calculated using Hess’s law: If a process can be written as the sum of several stepwise processes, the enthalpy change of the total process equals the sum of the enthalpy changes of the various steps.

## Key Equations

[[TABLE:2]]{id="key-equations-table"}

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises

:::exercise{id="fs-idp167492016"}
Explain how the heat measured in [↗]{ref="fs-idm19242032"} differs from the enthalpy change for the exothermic reaction described by the following equation:[[EQ:120]]

:::answer
The enthalpy change of the indicated reaction is for exactly 1 mol HCL and 1 mol NaOH; the heat in the example is produced by 0.0500 mol HCl and 0.0500 mol NaOH.

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp167504688"}
Using the data in the check your learning section of [↗]{ref="fs-idm19242032"}, calculate Δ*H* in kJ/mol of AgNO~3~(*aq*) for the reaction: [[EQ:121]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp146867872"}
Calculate the enthalpy of solution (Δ*H* for the dissolution) per mole of NH~4~NO~3~ under the conditions described in [↗]{ref="fs-idp325184"}.

:::answer
25 kJ mol^−1^

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp140736768"}
Calculate Δ*H* for the reaction described by the equation. (*Hint*: Use the value for the approximate amount of heat absorbed by the reaction that you calculated in a previous exercise.)[[EQ:122]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp107667280"}
Calculate the enthalpy of solution (Δ*H* for the dissolution) per mole of CaCl~2~ (refer to [Section]{doc="m68726"}).

:::answer
81 kJ mol^−1^

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp103276080"}
Although the gas used in an oxyacetylene torch ([↗]{ref="CNX_Chem_05_01_OxyacTorch"}) is essentially pure acetylene, the heat produced by combustion of one mole of acetylene in such a torch is likely not equal to the enthalpy of combustion of acetylene listed in [↗]{ref="fs-idp98710048"}. Considering the conditions for which the tabulated data are reported, suggest an explanation.

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp103280960"}
How much heat is produced by burning 4.00 moles of acetylene under standard state conditions?

:::answer
5204.4 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp103290416"}
How much heat is produced by combustion of 125 g of methanol under standard state conditions?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp169453984"}
How many moles of isooctane must be burned to produce 100 kJ of heat under standard state conditions?

:::answer
1.83 [[EQ:123]] 10^−2^ mol

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp169467440"}
What mass of carbon monoxide must be burned to produce 175 kJ of heat under standard state conditions?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp155902352"}
When 2.50 g of methane burns in oxygen, 125 kJ of heat is produced. What is the enthalpy of combustion per mole of methane under these conditions?

:::answer
–802 kJ mol^−1^

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp155924624"}
How much heat is produced when 100 mL of 0.250 M HCl (density, 1.00 g/mL) and 200 mL of 0.150 M NaOH (density, 1.00 g/mL) are mixed?[[EQ:124]]

If both solutions are at the same temperature and the specific heat of the products is 4.19 J/g °C, how much will the temperature increase? What assumption did you make in your calculation?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp166201552"}
A sample of 0.562 g of carbon is burned in oxygen in a bomb calorimeter, producing carbon dioxide. Assume both the reactants and products are under standard state conditions, and that the heat released is directly proportional to the enthalpy of combustion of graphite. The temperature of the calorimeter increases from 26.74 °C to 27.93 °C. What is the heat capacity of the calorimeter and its contents?

:::answer
15.5 kJ/ºC

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp25402064"}
Before the introduction of chlorofluorocarbons, sulfur dioxide (enthalpy of vaporization, 6.00 kcal/mol) was used in household refrigerators. What mass of SO~2~ must be evaporated to remove as much heat as evaporation of 1.00 kg of CCl~2~F~2~ (enthalpy of vaporization is 17.4 kJ/mol)?

The vaporization reactions for SO~2~ and CCl~2~F~2~ are [[EQ:125]] and [[EQ:126]] respectively.

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp140766896"}
Homes may be heated by pumping hot water through radiators. What mass of water will provide the same amount of heat when cooled from 95.0 to 35.0 °C, as the heat provided when 100 g of steam is cooled from 110 °C to 100 °C?

:::answer
7.43 g

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp104124592"}
Which of the enthalpies of combustion in [↗]{ref="fs-idp98710048"} the table are also standard enthalpies of formation?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp165421856"}
Does the standard enthalpy of formation of H~2~O(*g*) differ from Δ*H*° for the reaction [[EQ:127]]

:::answer
Yes.

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp165437584"}
Joseph Priestly prepared oxygen in 1774 by heating red mercury(II) oxide with sunlight focused through a lens. How much heat is required to decompose exactly 1 mole of red HgO(*s*) to Hg(*l*) and O~2~(*g*) under standard conditions?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp161282368"}
How many kilojoules of heat will be released when exactly 1 mole of manganese, Mn, is burned to form Mn~3~O~4~(*s*) at standard state conditions?

:::answer
459.6 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp161291648"}
How many kilojoules of heat will be released when exactly 1 mole of iron, Fe, is burned to form Fe~2~O~3~(*s*) at standard state conditions?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp184316112"}
The following sequence of reactions occurs in the commercial production of aqueous nitric acid:[[EQ:128]][[EQ:129]][[EQ:130]]

Determine the total enthalpy change for the production of one mole of aqueous nitric acid by this process. Coproducts of the net reaction include water and nitrogen monoxide.

:::answer
−494 kJ/mol

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp154782528"}
Both graphite and diamond burn.[[EQ:131]]

For the conversion of graphite to diamond:[[EQ:132]]

Which produces more heat, the combustion of graphite or the combustion of diamond?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp161090368"}
From the molar heats of formation in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, determine how much heat is required to evaporate one mole of water: [[EQ:133]]

:::answer
44.01 kJ/mol

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp157714624"}
Which produces more heat?[[EQ:134]] or[[EQ:135]]

for the phase change [[EQ:136]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp155265632"}
Calculate [[EQ:137]] for the process[[EQ:138]]

from the following information:[[EQ:139]]

:::answer
−394 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp173454656"}
Calculate [[EQ:140]] for the process [[EQ:141]]

from the following information:[[EQ:142]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp128497376"}
Calculate Δ*H* for the process [[EQ:143]]

from the following information:[[EQ:144]]

:::answer
265 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp204534224"}
Calculate [[EQ:145]] for the process [[EQ:146]]

from the following information:[[EQ:147]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp28899760"}
Calculate the standard molar enthalpy of formation of NO(*g*) from the following data:[[EQ:148]]

:::answer
90.3 kJ/mol

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp149472576"}
Using the data in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, calculate the standard enthalpy change for each of the following reactions:

(a) [[EQ:149]]

(b) [[EQ:150]]

(c) [[EQ:151]]

(d) [[EQ:152]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp126940864"}
Using the data in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, calculate the standard enthalpy change for each of the following reactions:

(a) [[EQ:153]]

(b) [[EQ:154]]

(c) [[EQ:155]]

(d) [[EQ:156]]

:::answer
(a) −1615.0 kJ mol^−1^; (b) −484.3 kJ mol^−1^; (c) 164.2 kJ; (d) −232.1 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp161656784"}
The following reactions can be used to prepare samples of metals. Determine the enthalpy change under standard state conditions for each.

(a) [[EQ:157]]

(b) [[EQ:158]]

(c) [[EQ:159]]

(d) [[EQ:160]]

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp184430560"}
The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, H~2~O~2~, has been used to provide thrust in the control jets of various space vehicles. Using the data in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, determine how much heat is produced by the decomposition of exactly 1 mole of H~2~O~2~ under standard conditions.[[EQ:161]]

:::answer
−54.04 kJ mol^−1^

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp173500624"}
Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of propane, C~3~H~8~(*g*), for the formation of H~2~O(*g*) and CO~2~(*g*). The enthalpy of formation of propane is −104 kJ/mol.

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp86137744"}
Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of butane, C~4~H~10~(*g*) for the formation of H~2~O(*g*) and CO~2~(*g*). The enthalpy of formation of butane is −126 kJ/mol.

:::answer
−2660 kJ mol^−1^

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp214812192"}
Both propane and butane are used as gaseous fuels. Which compound produces more heat per gram when burned?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp214849200"}
The white pigment TiO~2~ is prepared by the reaction of titanium tetrachloride, TiCl~4~, with water vapor in the gas phase: [[EQ:162]]

How much heat is evolved in the production of exactly 1 mole of TiO~2~(*s*) under standard state conditions?

:::answer
–66.4 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp195101120"}
Water gas, a mixture of H~2~ and CO, is an important industrial fuel produced by the reaction of steam with red hot coke, essentially pure carbon: [[EQ:163]]

(a) Assuming that coke has the same enthalpy of formation as graphite, calculate [[EQ:164]] for this reaction.

(b) Methanol, a liquid fuel that could possibly replace gasoline, can be prepared from water gas and additional hydrogen at high temperature and pressure in the presence of a suitable catalyst: [[EQ:165]]

Under the conditions of the reaction, methanol forms as a gas. Calculate [[EQ:166]] for this reaction and for the condensation of gaseous methanol to liquid methanol.

(c) Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of liquid methanol to H~2~O(*g*) and CO~2~(*g*).

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp160735680"}
In the early days of automobiles, illumination at night was provided by burning acetylene, C~2~H~2~. Though no longer used as auto headlamps, acetylene is still used as a source of light by some cave explorers. The acetylene is (was) prepared in the lamp by the reaction of water with calcium carbide, CaC~2~:[[EQ:167]] Calculate the standard enthalpy of the reaction. The [[EQ:168]] of CaC~2~ is −15.14 kcal/mol.

:::answer
−122.8 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp43583200"}
From the data in [↗]{ref="fs-idp98710048"}, determine which of the following fuels produces the greatest amount of heat per gram when burned under standard conditions: CO(*g*), CH~4~(*g*), or C~2~H~2~(*g*).

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp208963152"}
The enthalpy of combustion of hard coal averages −35 kJ/g, that of gasoline, 1.28 [[EQ:169]] 10^5^ kJ/gal. How many kilograms of hard coal provide the same amount of heat as is available from 1.0 gallon of gasoline? Assume that the density of gasoline is 0.692 g/mL (the same as the density of isooctane).

:::answer
3.7 kg

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp208987456"}
Ethanol, C~2~H~5~OH, is used as a fuel for motor vehicles, particularly in Brazil.

(a) Write the balanced equation for the combustion of ethanol to CO~2~(*g*) and H~2~O(*g*), and, using the data in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, calculate the enthalpy of combustion of 1 mole of ethanol.

(b) The density of ethanol is 0.7893 g/mL. Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of exactly 1 L of ethanol.

(c) Assuming that an automobile’s mileage is directly proportional to the heat of combustion of the fuel, calculate how much farther an automobile could be expected to travel on 1 L of gasoline than on 1 L of ethanol. Assume that gasoline has the heat of combustion and the density of n–octane, C~8~H~18~ [[EQ:170]] density = 0.7025 g/mL).

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp181957264"}
Among the substances that react with oxygen and that have been considered as potential rocket fuels are diborane [B~2~H~6~, produces B~2~O~3~(*s*) and H~2~O(*g*)], methane [CH~4~, produces CO~2~(*g*) and H~2~O(*g*)], and hydrazine [N~2~H~4~, produces N~2~(*g*) and H~2~O(*g*)]. On the basis of the heat released by 1.00 g of each substance in its reaction with oxygen, which of these compounds offers the best possibility as a rocket fuel? The [[EQ:171]] of B~2~H~6~(*g*), CH~4~(*g*), and N~2~H~4~(*l*) may be found in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}.

:::answer
On the assumption that the best rocket fuel is the one that gives off the most heat, B~2~H~6~ is the prime candidate.

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp124891680"}
How much heat is produced when 1.25 g of chromium metal reacts with oxygen gas under standard conditions?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp124901952"}
Ethylene, C~2~H~4~, a byproduct from the fractional distillation of petroleum, is fourth among the 50 chemical compounds produced commercially in the largest quantities. About 80% of synthetic ethanol is manufactured from ethylene by its reaction with water in the presence of a suitable catalyst. [[EQ:172]]

Using the data in the table in [Appendix G]{doc="m68865"}, calculate Δ*H*° for the reaction.

:::answer
−88.2 kJ

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp149397888"}
The oxidation of the sugar glucose, C~6~H~12~O~6~, is described by the following equation:[[EQ:173]]

The metabolism of glucose gives the same products, although the glucose reacts with oxygen in a series of steps in the body.

(a) How much heat in kilojoules can be produced by the metabolism of 1.0 g of glucose?

(b) How many Calories can be produced by the metabolism of 1.0 g of glucose?

:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp211817568"}
Propane, C~3~H~8~, is a hydrocarbon that is commonly used as a fuel.

(a) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of propane gas.

(b) Calculate the volume of air at 25 °C and 1.00 atmosphere that is needed to completely combust 25.0 grams of propane. Assume that air is 21.0 percent O~2~ by volume. (Hint: We will see how to do this calculation in a later chapter on gases—for now use the information that 1.00 L of air at 25 °C and 1.00 atm contains 0.275 g of O~2~.)

(c) The heat of combustion of propane is −2,219.2 kJ/mol. Calculate the heat of formation, [[EQ:174]] of propane given that [[EQ:175]] of H~2~O(*l*) = −285.8 kJ/mol and [[EQ:176]] of CO~2~(*g*) = −393.5 kJ/mol.

(d) Assuming that all of the heat released in burning 25.0 grams of propane is transferred to 4.00 kilograms of water, calculate the increase in temperature of the water.

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:177]] (b) 330 L air; (c) −104.5 kJ mol^−1^; (d) 75.4 °C

:::
:::

:::exercise{id="fs-idp165246448"}
During a recent winter month in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, it was necessary to obtain 3500 kWh of heat provided by a natural gas furnace with 89% efficiency to keep a small house warm (the efficiency of a gas furnace is the percent of the heat produced by combustion that is transferred into the house).

(a) Assume that natural gas is pure methane and determine the volume of natural gas in cubic feet that was required to heat the house. The average temperature of the natural gas was 56 °F; at this temperature and a pressure of 1 atm, natural gas has a density of 0.681 g/L.