## titill: „Enthalpy" kafli: „5.3" eining: „m68727" tungumál: „en" hluti: „d"

(b) How many gallons of LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) would be required to replace the natural gas used? Assume the LPG is liquid propane [C~3~H~8~: density, 0.5318 g/mL; enthalpy of combustion, 2219 kJ/mol for the formation of CO~2~(*g*) and H~2~O(*l*)] and the furnace used to burn the LPG has the same efficiency as the gas furnace.

(c) What mass of carbon dioxide is produced by combustion of the methane used to heat the house?

(d) What mass of water is produced by combustion of the methane used to heat the house?

(e) What volume of air is required to provide the oxygen for the combustion of the methane used to heat the house? Air contains 23% oxygen by mass. The average density of air during the month was 1.22 g/L.

(f) How many kilowatt–hours (1 kWh = 3.6 [[EQ:178]] 10^6^ J) of electricity would be required to provide the heat necessary to heat the house? Note electricity is 100% efficient in producing heat inside a house.

(g) Although electricity is 100% efficient in producing heat inside a house, production and distribution of electricity is not 100% efficient. The efficiency of production and distribution of electricity produced in a coal-fired power plant is about 40%. A certain type of coal provides 2.26 kWh per pound upon combustion. What mass of this coal in kilograms will be required to produce the electrical energy necessary to heat the house if the efficiency of generation and distribution is 40%?

:::