## titill: „Atomic Structure and Symbolism" kafli: „2.3" eining: „m68692" tungumál: „en" hluti: „c"

(b) Now remove one electron to make an ion and give the symbol for the ion you have created.

:::answer
(a) Lithium-6 contains three protons, three neutrons, and three electrons. The isotope symbol is ^6^Li or [[EQ:41]] (b) ^6^Li^+^ or [[EQ:42]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm75926528}
Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in the following isotopes that are used in medical diagnoses:

(a) atomic number 9, mass number 18, charge of 1−

(b) atomic number 43, mass number 99, charge of 7+

(c) atomic number 53, atomic mass number 131, charge of 1−

(d) atomic number 81, atomic mass number 201, charge of 1+

(e) Name the elements in parts (a), (b), (c), and (d).

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm187202528}
The following are properties of isotopes of two elements that are essential in our diet. Determine the number of protons, neutrons and electrons in each and name them.

(a) atomic number 26, mass number 58, charge of 2+

(b) atomic number 53, mass number 127, charge of 1−

:::answer
(a) Iron, 26 protons, 24 electrons, and 32 neutrons; (b) iodine, 53 protons, 54 electrons, and 74 neutrons

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp18872976}
Give the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in neutral atoms of each of the following isotopes:

(a) [[EQ:43]]

(b) [[EQ:44]]

(c) [[EQ:45]]

(d) [[EQ:46]]

(e) [[EQ:47]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm80933584}
Give the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in neutral atoms of each of the following isotopes:

(a) [[EQ:48]]

(b) [[EQ:49]]

(c) [[EQ:50]]

(d) [[EQ:51]]

(e) [[EQ:52]]

:::answer
(a) 3 protons, 3 electrons, 4 neutrons; (b) 52 protons, 52 electrons, 73 neutrons; (c) 47 protons, 47 electrons, 62 neutrons; (d) 7 protons, 7 electrons, 8 neutrons; (e) 15 protons, 15 electrons, 16 neutrons

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm28786800}
Click on the [site]{url="http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomMass"} and select the “Mix Isotopes” tab, hide the “Percent Composition” and “Average Atomic Mass” boxes, and then select the element boron.

(a) Write the symbols of the isotopes of boron that are shown as naturally occurring in significant amounts.

(b) Predict the relative amounts (percentages) of these boron isotopes found in nature. Explain the reasoning behind your choice.

(c) Add isotopes to the black box to make a mixture that matches your prediction in (b). You may drag isotopes from their bins or click on “More” and then move the sliders to the appropriate amounts.

(d) Reveal the “Percent Composition” and “Average Atomic Mass” boxes. How well does your mixture match with your prediction? If necessary, adjust the isotope amounts to match your prediction.

(e) Select “Nature’s” mix of isotopes and compare it to your prediction. How well does your prediction compare with the naturally occurring mixture? Explain. If necessary, adjust your amounts to make them match “Nature’s” amounts as closely as possible.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm112612912}
Repeat [↗]{ref="fs-idm28786800"} using an element that has three naturally occurring isotopes.

:::answer
Let us use neon as an example. Since there are three isotopes, there is no way to be sure to accurately predict the abundances to make the total of 20.18 amu average atomic mass. Let us guess that the abundances are 9% Ne-22, 91% Ne-20, and only a trace of Ne-21. The average mass would be 20.18 amu. Checking the nature’s mix of isotopes shows that the abundances are 90.48% Ne-20, 9.25% Ne-22, and 0.27% Ne-21, so our guessed amounts have to be slightly adjusted.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm201300912}
An element has the following natural abundances and isotopic masses: 90.92% abundance with 19.99 amu, 0.26% abundance with 20.99 amu, and 8.82% abundance with 21.99 amu. Calculate the average atomic mass of this element.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp165798448}
Average atomic masses listed by IUPAC are based on a study of experimental results. Bromine has two isotopes, ^79^Br and ^81^Br, whose masses (78.9183 and 80.9163 amu, respectively) and abundances (50.69% and 49.31%, respectively) were determined in earlier experiments. Calculate the average atomic mass of bromine based on these experiments.

:::answer
79.90 amu

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp15704448}
Variations in average atomic mass may be observed for elements obtained from different sources. Lithium provides an example of this. The isotopic composition of lithium from naturally occurring minerals is 7.5% ^6^Li and 92.5% ^7^Li, which have masses of 6.01512 amu and 7.01600 amu, respectively. A commercial source of lithium, recycled from a military source, was 3.75% ^6^Li (and the rest ^7^Li). Calculate the average atomic mass values for each of these two sources.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm95116240}
The average atomic masses of some elements may vary, depending upon the sources of their ores. Naturally occurring boron consists of two isotopes with accurately known masses (^10^B, 10.0129 amu and ^11^B, 11.00931 amu). The actual atomic mass of boron can vary from 10.807 to 10.819, depending on whether the mineral source is from Turkey or the United States. Calculate the percent abundances leading to the two values of the average atomic masses of boron from these two countries.

:::answer
Turkey source: 20.3% (of 10.0129 amu isotope); US source: 19.1% (of 10.0129 amu isotope)

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm4055376}
The ^18^O:^16^O abundance ratio in some meteorites is greater than that used to calculate the average atomic mass of oxygen on earth. Is the average mass of an oxygen atom in these meteorites greater than, less than, or equal to that of a terrestrial oxygen atom?

:::