## titill: „Chemical Nomenclature" kafli: „2.7" eining: „m68698" tungumál: „en" hluti: „b"

Name the following covalent compounds:

(a) SF~6~

(b) N~2~O~3~

(c) Cl~2~O~7~

(d) P~4~O~6~

**Solution**

Because these compounds consist solely of nonmetals, we use prefixes to designate the number of atoms of each element:

(a) sulfur hexafluoride

(b) dinitrogen trioxide

(c) dichlorine heptoxide

(d) tetraphosphorus hexoxide

**Check Your Learning**

Write the formulas for the following compounds:

(a) phosphorus pentachloride

(b) dinitrogen monoxide

(c) iodine heptafluoride

(d) carbon tetrachloride

(a) PCl~5~; (b) N~2~O; (c) IF~7~; (d) CCl~4~

:::

:::note
### Answer:

(a) PCl~5~; (b) N~2~O; (c) IF~7~; (d) CCl~4~

:::

:::link-to-material
The following [website]{url="http://openstax.org/l/16chemcompname"} provides practice with naming chemical compounds and writing chemical formulas. You can choose binary, polyatomic, and variable charge ionic compounds, as well as molecular compounds.

:::

## Binary Acids

Some compounds containing hydrogen are members of an important class of substances known as acids. The chemistry of these compounds is explored in more detail in later chapters of this text, but for now, it will suffice to note that many acids release hydrogen ions, H^+^, when dissolved in water. To denote this distinct chemical property, a mixture of water with an acid is given a name derived from the compound’s name. If the compound is a **binary acid**{id="term-00005"} (comprised of hydrogen and one other nonmetallic element):

For example, when the gas HCl (hydrogen chloride) is dissolved in water, the solution is called *hydrochloric acid*. Several other examples of this nomenclature are shown in [↗]{ref="fs-idp272649888"}.

**Names of Some Simple Acids**

| Name of Gas | Name of Acid |
| :--- | :--- |
| HF(*g*), hydrogen fluoride | HF(*aq*), hydrofluoric acid |
| HCl(*g*), hydrogen chloride | HCl(*aq*), hydrochloric acid |
| HBr(*g*), hydrogen bromide | HBr(*aq*), hydrobromic acid |
| HI(*g*), hydrogen iodide | HI(*aq*), hydroiodic acid |
| H~2~S(*g*), hydrogen sulfide | H~2~S(*aq*), hydrosulfuric acid |
{id="fs-idp272649888" summary="The names of simple acids included in this table are: H F gas, which is hydrogen fluoride, H C l gas which is hydrogen chloride, H B r gas which is hydrogen bromide, H I gas which is hydrogen iodide, H subscript 2 S gas which is hydrogen sulfide, H F aqueous which is hydrofluoric acid, H C l aqueous which is hydrochloric acid, H B r aqueous which is hydrobromic acid, H I aqueous which is hydroiodic acid, and H subscript 2 S aqueous which is hydrosulfuric acid."}

## Oxyacids

Many compounds containing three or more elements (such as organic compounds or coordination compounds) are subject to specialized nomenclature rules that you will learn later. However, we will briefly discuss the important compounds known as **oxyacids**{id="term-00006"}, compounds that contain hydrogen, oxygen, and at least one other element, and are bonded in such a way as to impart acidic properties to the compound (you will learn the details of this in a later chapter). Typical oxyacids consist of hydrogen combined with a polyatomic, oxygen-containing ion. To name oxyacids:

For example, consider H~2~CO~3~ (which you might be tempted to call “hydrogen carbonate”). To name this correctly, “hydrogen” is omitted; the –*ate* of carbonate is replace with –*ic*; and acid is added—so its name is carbonic acid. Other examples are given in [↗]{ref="fs-idp268340336"}. There are some exceptions to the general naming method (e.g., H~2~SO~4~ is called sulfuric acid, not sulfic acid, and H~2~SO~3~ is sulfurous, not sulfous, acid).

**Names of Common Oxyacids**

| Formula | Anion Name | Acid Name |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| HC~2~H~3~O~2~ | acetate | acetic acid |
| HNO~3~ | nitrate | nitric acid |
| HNO~2~ | nitrite | nitrous acid |
| HClO~4~ | perchlorate | perchloric acid |
| H~2~CO~3~ | carbonate | carbonic acid |
| H~2~SO~4~ | sulfate | sulfuric acid |
| H~2~SO~3~ | sulfite | sulfurous acid |
| H~3~PO~4~ | phosphate | phosphoric acid |
{id="fs-idp268340336" summary="This table has three columns labeled “formula”, “anion name”, and “acid name”. H C subscript 2 H subscript 3 O subscript 2 is named acetate or acetic acid. H N O subscript 3 is named nitrate or nitric acid. H N O subscript 2 is named nitrite or nitrous acid, H C l O subscript 4 is named perchlorate or perchloric acid. H subscript 2 C O subscript 3 is named carbonate or carbonic acid. H subscript 2 S O subscript 4 is named sulfate or sulfuric acid. H subscript 2 S O subscript 3 is named sulfite or sulfurous acid. H subscript 3 P O subscript 4 is named phosphate or phosphoric acid."}

## Key Concepts and Summary

Chemists use nomenclature rules to clearly name compounds. Ionic and molecular compounds are named using somewhat-different methods. Binary ionic compounds typically consist of a metal and a nonmetal. The name of the metal is written first, followed by the name of the nonmetal with its ending changed to –*ide*. For example, K~2~O is called potassium oxide. If the metal can form ions with different charges, a Roman numeral in parentheses follows the name of the metal to specify its charge. Thus, FeCl~2~ is iron(II) chloride and FeCl~3~ is iron(III) chloride. Some compounds contain polyatomic ions; the names of common polyatomic ions should be memorized. Molecular compounds can form compounds with different ratios of their elements, so prefixes are used to specify the numbers of atoms of each element in a molecule of the compound. Examples include SF~6~, sulfur hexafluoride, and N~2~O~4~, dinitrogen tetroxide. Acids are an important class of compounds containing hydrogen and having special nomenclature rules. Binary acids are named using the prefix *hydro-*, changing the –*ide* suffix to –*ic*, and adding “acid;” HCl is hydrochloric acid. Oxyacids are named by changing the ending of the anion (–*ate* to –*ic* and –*ite* to –*ous*), and adding “acid;” H~2~CO~3~ is carbonic acid.

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp282297472}
Name the following compounds:

(a) CsCl

(b) BaO

(c) K~2~S

(d) BeCl~2~

(e) HBr

(f) AlF~3~

:::answer
(a) cesium chloride; (b) barium oxide; (c) potassium sulfide; (d) beryllium chloride; (e) hydrogen bromide; (f) aluminum fluoride

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp283375776}
Name the following compounds:

(a) NaF

(b) Rb~2~O

(c) BCl~3~

(d) H~2~Se

(e) P~4~O~6~

(f) ICl~3~

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm250352}
Write the formulas of the following compounds:

(a) rubidium bromide

(b) magnesium selenide

(c) sodium oxide

(d) calcium chloride

(e) hydrogen fluoride

(f) gallium phosphide

(g) aluminum bromide

(h) ammonium sulfate

:::answer
(a) RbBr; (b) MgSe; (c) Na~2~O; (d) CaCl~2~; (e) HF; (f) GaP; (g) AlBr~3~; (h) (NH~4~)~2~SO~4~

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp279465312}
Write the formulas of the following compounds:

(a) lithium carbonate

(b) sodium perchlorate

(c) barium hydroxide

(d) ammonium carbonate

(e) sulfuric acid

(f) calcium acetate

(g) magnesium phosphate

(h) sodium sulfite

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp268321696}
Write the formulas of the following compounds:

(a) chlorine dioxide

(b) dinitrogen tetraoxide

(c) potassium phosphide

(d) silver sulfide

(e) aluminum fluoride trihydrate

(f) silicon dioxide

:::answer
(a) ClO~2~; (b) N~2~O~4~; (c) K~3~P; (d) Ag~2~S; (e) AIF~3~·3H~2~O; (f) SiO~2~

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp279319168}
Write the formulas of the following compounds:

(a) barium chloride

(b) magnesium nitride

(c) sulfur dioxide

(d) nitrogen trichloride

(e) dinitrogen trioxide

(f) tin(IV) chloride

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp279515392}
Each of the following compounds contains a metal that can exhibit more than one ionic charge. Name these compounds:

(a) Cr~2~O~3~

(b) FeCl~2~

(c) CrO~3~

(d) TiCl~4~

(e) CoCl~2~·6H~2~O

(f) MoS~2~

:::answer
(a) chromium(III) oxide; (b) iron(II) chloride; (c) chromium(VI) oxide; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e) cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate; (f) molybdenum(IV) sulfide

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp268274912}
Each of the following compounds contains a metal that can exhibit more than one ionic charge. Name these compounds:

(a) NiCO~3~

(b) MoO~3~

(c) Co(NO~3~)~2~

(d) V~2~O~5~

(e) MnO~2~

(f) Fe~2~O~3~

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp268365168}
The following ionic compounds are found in common household products. Write the formulas for each compound:

(a) potassium phosphate

(b) copper(II) sulfate

(c) calcium chloride

(d) titanium(IV) oxide

(e) ammonium nitrate

(f) sodium bisulfate (the common name for sodium hydrogen sulfate)

:::answer
(a) K~3~PO~4~; (b) CuSO~4~; (c) CaCl~2~; (d) TiO~2~; (e) NH~4~NO~3~; (f) NaHSO~4~

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp282334032}
The following ionic compounds are found in common household products. Name each of the compounds:

(a) Ca(H~2~PO~4~)~2~

(b) FeSO~4~

(c) CaCO~3~

(d) MgO

(e) NaNO~2~

(f) KI

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp268310912}
What are the IUPAC names of the following compounds?

(a) manganese dioxide

(b) mercurous chloride (Hg~2~Cl~2~)

(c) ferric nitrate [Fe(NO~3~)~3~]

(d) titanium tetrachloride

(e) cupric bromide (CuBr~2~)

:::answer
(a) manganese(IV) oxide; (b) mercury(I) chloride; (c) iron(III) nitrate; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e) copper(II) bromide

:::
:::