## titill: „Chemistry in Context" kafli: „1.1" eining: „m68664" tungumál: „en" hluti: „b"

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm58468592}
Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For any in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature.

(a) The mass of a _lead pipe_ is 14 lb.

(b) The mass of a certain _chlorine atom_ is 35 amu.

(c) A bottle with a label that reads _Al_ contains aluminum metal.

(d) _Al_ is the symbol for an aluminum atom.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm67489232}
Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain, or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For those in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature.

(a) A certain molecule contains one _H_ atom and one Cl atom.

(b) _Copper wire_ has a density of about 8 g/cm^3^.

(c) The bottle contains 15 grams of _Ni powder_.

(d) A _sulfur molecule_ is composed of eight sulfur atoms.

:::answer
(a) symbolic, microscopic; (b) macroscopic; (c) symbolic, macroscopic; (d) microscopic

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp6505632}
According to one theory, the pressure of a gas increases as its volume decreases because the molecules in the gas have to move a shorter distance to hit the walls of the container. Does this theory follow a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp40361152}
The amount of heat required to melt 2 lbs of ice is twice the amount of heat required to melt 1 lb of ice. Is this observation a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.

:::answer
Macroscopic. The heat required is determined from macroscopic properties.

:::
:::