## titill: „Classifying Chemical Reactions" kafli: „4.2" eining: „m68710" tungumál: „en" hluti: „c"

Is this a redox reaction? If so, provide a more specific name for the reaction if appropriate, and identify the oxidant and reductant.

Yes, a single-replacement reaction. Sn(*s*)is the reductant, HCl(*g*) is the oxidant.

:::

:::note
### Answer:

Yes, a single-replacement reaction. Sn(*s*)is the reductant, HCl(*g*) is the oxidant.

:::

Redox reactions that take place in aqueous media often involve water, hydronium ions, and hydroxide ions as reactants or products. Although these species are not oxidized or reduced, they do participate in chemical change in other ways (e.g., by providing the elements required to form oxyanions). Equations representing these reactions are sometimes very difficult to balance by inspection, so systematic approaches have been developed to assist in the process. One very useful approach is to use the method of half-reactions, which involves the following steps:

1. Write the two half-reactions representing the redox process.

2. Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen.

3. Balance oxygen atoms by adding H~2~O molecules.

4. Balance hydrogen atoms by adding H^+^ ions.

5. Balance charge by adding electrons.

6. If necessary, multiply each half-reaction’s coefficients by the smallest possible integers to yield equal numbers of electrons in each.

7. Add the balanced half-reactions together and simplify by removing species that appear on both sides of the equation.

8. For reactions occurring in basic media (excess hydroxide ions), carry out these additional steps:

9. Finally, check to see that both the number of atoms and the total chargesThe requirement of “charge balance” is just a specific type of “mass balance” in which the species in question are electrons. An equation must represent equal numbers of electrons on the reactant and product sides, and so both atoms and charges must be balanced. are balanced.

::: example
### Example 4.7: Balancing Redox Reactions in Acidic Solution

Write a balanced equation for the reaction between dichromate ion and iron(II) to yield iron(III) and chromium(III) in acidic solution.

[[EQ:31]]{id="fs-idm59837744"}

**Solution**

*Write the two half-reactions*.

Each half-reaction will contain one reactant and one product with one element in common. [[EQ:32]]{id="fs-idm158485920"} [[EQ:33]]{id="fs-idm115501120"}

*Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen*. The iron half-reaction is already balanced, but the chromium half-reaction shows two Cr atoms on the left and one Cr atom on the right. Changing the coefficient on the right side of the equation to 2 achieves balance with regard to Cr atoms. [[EQ:34]]{id="fs-idm214288784"} [[EQ:35]]{id="fs-idm209224928"}

*Balance oxygen atoms by adding* H~2~O* molecules*. The iron half-reaction does not contain O atoms. The chromium half-reaction shows seven O atoms on the left and none on the right, so seven water molecules are added to the right side. [[EQ:36]]{id="fs-idm223648432"}

*Balance hydrogen atoms by adding* H^+^*ions*. The iron half-reaction does not contain H atoms. The chromium half-reaction shows 14 H atoms on the right and none on the left, so 14 hydrogen ions are added to the left side. [[EQ:37]]{id="fs-idm110660208"} [[EQ:38]]{id="fs-idm113051632"}

*Balance charge by adding electrons*. The iron half-reaction shows a total charge of 2+ on the left side (1 Fe^2+^ ion) and 3+ on the right side (1 Fe^3+^ ion). Adding one electron to the right side brings that side’s total charge to (3+) + (1−) = 2+, and charge balance is achieved.

The chromium half-reaction shows a total charge of (1 [[EQ:61]] 2−) + (14 [[EQ:62]] 1+) = 12+ on the left side [[EQ:63]] ion and 14 H^+^ ions). The total charge on the right side is (2 [[EQ:64]] 3+) = 6 + (2 Cr^3+^ ions). Adding six electrons to the left side will bring that side’s total charge to (12+ + 6−) = 6+, and charge balance is achieved. [[EQ:39]]{id="fs-idm225038592"} [[EQ:40]]{id="fs-idm249297696"}

*Multiply the two half-reactions so the number of electrons in one reaction equals the number of electrons in the other reaction*. To be consistent with mass conservation, and the idea that redox reactions involve the transfer (not creation or destruction) of electrons, the iron half-reaction’s coefficient must be multiplied by 6. [[EQ:41]]{id="fs-idm65092096"} [[EQ:42]]{id="fs-idm129012256"}

*Add the balanced half-reactions and cancel species that appear on both sides of the equation*. [[EQ:43]]{id="fs-idm208390896"}

Only the six electrons are redundant species. Removing them from each side of the equation yields the simplified, balanced equation here: [[EQ:44]]{id="fs-idm273483584"}

A final check of atom and charge balance confirms the equation is balanced.

**Check Your Learning**

In basic solution, molecular chlorine, Cl~2~, reacts with hydroxide ions, OH^−^, to yield chloride ions, Cl^−^. and chlorate ions, ClO~3~^−^. HINT: This is a *disproportionation reaction* in which the element chlorine is both oxidized and reduced. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.

:::

| Reactants | Products |
| :--- | :--- |
| Fe | 6 | 6 |
| Cr | 2 | 2 |
| O | 7 | 7 |
| H | 14 | 14 |
| charge | 24+ | 24+ |
{id="fs-idp8525760" summary="This table has three columns and six rows. The first column is unlabeled but the second and third columns are labeled, “Reactants,” and “Products.” Under the first column are the following: “F e,” “C r,” “O,” “H,” and, “charge.” Under the “Reactants” column are the numbers: 6, 2, 7, 14, 24 plus sign. Under the “Products” column are the numbers: 6, 2, 7, 14 and 24 plus sign."}

:::note
### Answer:

:::

## Key Concepts and Summary

Chemical reactions are classified according to similar patterns of behavior. A large number of important reactions are included in three categories: precipitation, acid-base, and oxidation-reduction (redox). Precipitation reactions involve the formation of one or more insoluble products. Acid-base reactions involve the transfer of hydrogen ions between reactants. Redox reactions involve a change in oxidation number for one or more reactant elements. Writing balanced equations for some redox reactions that occur in aqueous solutions is simplified by using a systematic approach called the half-reaction method.

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp29496096}
Use the following equations to answer the next four questions:

i. [[EQ:66]]

ii. [[EQ:67]]

iii. [[EQ:68]]

iv. [[EQ:69]]

v. [[EQ:70]]

(a) Which equation describes a physical change?

(b) Which equation identifies the reactants and products of a combustion reaction?

(c) Which equation is not balanced?

(d) Which is a net ionic equation?

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp89395536}
Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents:

(a) [[EQ:71]]

(b) [[EQ:72]]

(c) [[EQ:73]]

:::answer
(a) oxidation-reduction (addition); (b) acid-base (neutralization); (c) oxidation-reduction (combustion)

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp45308224}
Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents:

(a) [[EQ:74]]

(b) [[EQ:75]]

(c) [[EQ:76]]

(d) [[EQ:77]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm49658992}
Silver can be separated from gold because silver dissolves in nitric acid while gold does not. Is the dissolution of silver in nitric acid an acid-base reaction or an oxidation-reduction reaction? Explain your answer.

:::answer
It is an oxidation-reduction reaction because the oxidation state of the silver changes during the reaction.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm120814704}
Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the following compounds:

(a) NaI

(b) GdCl~3~

(c) LiNO~3~

(d) H~2~Se

(e) Mg~2~Si

(f) RbO~2~, rubidium superoxide

(g) HF

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm48178048}
Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing compounds are peroxides or superoxides.

(a) H~3~PO~4~

(b) Al(OH)~3~

(c) SeO~2~

(d) KNO~2~

(e) In~2~S~3~

(f) P~4~O~6~

:::answer
(a) H +1, P +5, O −2; (b) Al +3, H +1, O −2; (c) Se +4, O −2; (d) K +1, N +3, O −2; (e) In +3, S −2; (f) P +3, O −2

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp9450288}
Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing compounds are peroxides or superoxides.

(a) H~2~SO~4~

(b) Ca(OH)~2~

(c) BrOH

(d) ClNO~2~

(e) TiCl~4~

(f) NaH

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp153725776}
Classify the following as acid-base reactions or oxidation-reduction reactions:

(a) [[EQ:78]]

(b) [[EQ:79]]

(c) [[EQ:80]]

(d) [[EQ:81]]

(e) [[EQ:82]]

(f) [[EQ:83]]

:::answer
(a) acid-base; (b) oxidation-reduction: Na is oxidized, H^+^ is reduced; (c) oxidation-reduction: Mg is oxidized, Cl~2~ is reduced; (d) acid-base; (e) oxidation-reduction: P^3−^ is oxidized, O~2~ is reduced; (f) acid-base

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp16823936}
Identify the atoms that are oxidized and reduced, the change in oxidation state for each, and the oxidizing and reducing agents in each of the following equations:

(a) [[EQ:84]]

(b) [[EQ:85]]

(c) [[EQ:86]]

(d) [[EQ:87]]

(e) [[EQ:88]]

(f) [[EQ:89]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm48437584}
Complete and balance the following acid-base equations:

(a) HCl gas reacts with solid Ca(OH)~2~(*s*).

(b) A solution of Sr(OH)~2~ is added to a solution of HNO~3~.

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:90]] (b) [[EQ:91]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp4908480}
Complete and balance the following acid-base equations:

(a) A solution of HClO~4~ is added to a solution of LiOH.

(b) Aqueous H~2~SO~4~ reacts with NaOH.

(c) Ba(OH)~2~ reacts with HF gas.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm6604608}
Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible oxidation state for the oxidized atoms.

(a) [[EQ:92]]

(b) [[EQ:93]] (single displacement)

(c) [[EQ:94]]

(d) [[EQ:95]] (products are a strong base and a diatomic gas)

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:96]] (b) [[EQ:97]] (c) [[EQ:98]] (d) [[EQ:99]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp9275200}
Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible oxidation state for the oxidized atoms.

(a) [[EQ:100]]

(b) [[EQ:101]]

(c) [[EQ:102]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp105919968}
Complete and balance the equations for the following acid-base neutralization reactions. If water is used as a solvent, write the reactants and products as aqueous ions. In some cases, there may be more than one correct answer, depending on the amounts of reactants used.

(a) [[EQ:103]]

(b) [[EQ:104]]

(c) [[EQ:105]]

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:106]] (b) [[EQ:107]] (a solution of H~2~SO~4~); (c) [[EQ:108]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm58208656}
When heated to 700–800 °C, diamonds, which are pure carbon, are oxidized by atmospheric oxygen. (They burn!) Write the balanced equation for this reaction.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm9932800}
The military has experimented with lasers that produce very intense light when fluorine combines explosively with hydrogen. What is the balanced equation for this reaction?

:::answer
[[EQ:109]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm48911936}
Write the molecular, total ionic, and net ionic equations for the following reactions:

(a) [[EQ:110]]

(b) [[EQ:111]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp187257568}
Great Lakes Chemical Company produces bromine, Br~2~, from bromide salts such as NaBr, in Arkansas brine by treating the brine with chlorine gas. Write a balanced equation for the reaction of NaBr with Cl~2~.

:::answer
[[EQ:112]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm49879312}
In a common experiment in the general chemistry laboratory, magnesium metal is heated in air to produce MgO. MgO is a white solid, but in these experiments it often looks gray, due to small amounts of Mg~3~N~2~, a compound formed as some of the magnesium reacts with nitrogen. Write a balanced equation for each reaction.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp89418928}
Lithium hydroxide may be used to absorb carbon dioxide in enclosed environments, such as manned spacecraft and submarines. Write an equation for the reaction that involves 2 mol of LiOH per 1 mol of CO~2~. (Hint: Water is one of the products.)

:::answer
[[EQ:113]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp45994720}
Calcium propionate is sometimes added to bread to retard spoilage. This compound can be prepared by the reaction of calcium carbonate, CaCO~3~, with propionic acid, C~2~H~5~CO~2~H, which has properties similar to those of acetic acid. Write the balanced equation for the formation of calcium propionate.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp89462576}
Complete and balance the equations of the following reactions, each of which could be used to remove hydrogen sulfide from natural gas:

(a) [[EQ:114]]

(b) [[EQ:115]]

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:116]] (b) [[EQ:117]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp68926672}
Copper(II) sulfide is oxidized by molecular oxygen to produce gaseous sulfur trioxide and solid copper(II) oxide. The gaseous product then reacts with liquid water to produce liquid dihydrogen sulfate as the only product. Write the two equations which represent these reactions.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm49311296}
Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions used to prepare each of the following compounds from the given starting material(s). In some cases, additional reactants may be required.

(a) solid ammonium nitrate from gaseous molecular nitrogen via a two-step process (first reduce the nitrogen to ammonia, then neutralize the ammonia with an appropriate acid)

(b) gaseous hydrogen bromide from liquid molecular bromine via a one-step redox reaction

(c) gaseous H~2~S from solid Zn and S via a two-step process (first a redox reaction between the starting materials, then reaction of the product with a strong acid)

:::answer
(a) step 1: [[EQ:118]] step 2: [[EQ:119]] (b) [[EQ:120]] (c) [[EQ:121]] and [[EQ:122]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp89842528}
Calcium cyclamate Ca(C~6~H~11~NHSO~3~)~2~ is an artificial sweetener used in many countries around the world but is banned in the United States. It can be purified industrially by converting it to the barium salt through reaction of the acid C~6~H~11~NHSO~3~H with barium carbonate, treatment with sulfuric acid (barium sulfate is very insoluble), and then neutralization with calcium hydroxide. Write the balanced equations for these reactions.

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm11103504}
Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method):

(a) [[EQ:123]]

(b) [[EQ:124]]

(c) [[EQ:125]]

(d) [[EQ:126]] (in acidic solution)

(e) [[EQ:127]] (in basic solution)

(f) [[EQ:128]] (in acidic solution)

(g) [[EQ:129]] (in acidic solution)

(h) [[EQ:130]] (in basic solution)

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:131]] (b) [[EQ:132]] (c) [[EQ:133]] (d) [[EQ:134]] (e) [[EQ:135]] (f) [[EQ:136]] (g) [[EQ:137]] (h) [[EQ:138]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp30749376}
Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method):

(a) [[EQ:139]]

(b) [[EQ:140]]

(c) [[EQ:141]]

(d) [[EQ:142]] (in basic solution)

(e) [[EQ:143]] (in acidic solution)

(f) [[EQ:144]] (in acidic solution)

(g) [[EQ:145]] (in basic solution)

(h) [[EQ:146]] (in acidic solution)

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idm48094672}
Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:

(a) [[EQ:147]]

(b) [[EQ:148]]

(c) [[EQ:149]]

(d) [[EQ:150]]

(e) [[EQ:151]]

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:152]] (b) [[EQ:153]] (c) [[EQ:154]] (d) [[EQ:155]] (e) [[EQ:156]]

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp27470448}
Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:

(a) [[EQ:157]]

(b) [[EQ:158]]

(c) [[EQ:159]]

(d) [[EQ:160]]

(e) [[EQ:161]]

(f) [[EQ:162]]

(g) [[EQ:163]]

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp46083440}
Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:

(a) [[EQ:164]]

(b) [[EQ:165]]

(c) [[EQ:166]]

:::answer
(a) [[EQ:167]] (b) [[EQ:168]] (c) [[EQ:169]]

:::
:::