---
title: "Chemical Equilibria"
module: "m68797"
lang: "en"
---

# Chemical Equilibria

## Key Concepts and Summary

A reversible reaction is at equilibrium when the forward and reverse processes occur at equal rates. Chemical equilibria are dynamic processes characterized by constant amounts of reactant and product species.

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp156600272}
What does it mean to describe a reaction as “reversible”?

:::answer
The reaction can proceed in both the forward and reverse directions.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp122639232}
When writing an equation, how is a reversible reaction distinguished from a nonreversible reaction?

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp77430432}
If a reaction is reversible, when can it be said to have reached equilibrium?

:::answer
When a system has reached equilibrium, no further changes in the reactant and product concentrations occur; the forward and reverse reactions continue to proceed, but at equal rates.

:::
:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp13186176}
Is a system at equilibrium if the rate constants of the forward and reverse reactions are equal?

:::

:::practice-problem{#fs-idp9783616}
If the concentrations of products and reactants are equal, is the system at equilibrium?

:::answer
Not necessarily. A system at equilibrium is characterized by **constant** reactant and product concentrations, but the values of the reactant and product concentrations themselves need not be equal.

:::
:::

The convention for writing chemical equations involves placing reactant formulas on the left side of a reaction arrow and product formulas on the right side. By this convention, and the definitions of “reactant” and “product,” a chemical equation represents the reaction in question as proceeding from left to right. **Reversible reactions**{#term-00001}, however, may proceed in both forward (left to right) and reverse (right to left) directions. When the rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal, the concentrations of the reactant and product species remain constant over time and the system is at **equilibrium**{#term-00002}. The relative concentrations of reactants and products in equilibrium systems vary greatly; some systems contain mostly products at equilibrium, some contain mostly reactants, and some contain appreciable amounts of both.

[↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_equilibrium) illustrates fundamental equilibrium concepts using the reversible decomposition of colorless dinitrogen tetroxide to yield brown nitrogen dioxide, an elementary reaction described by the equation:

Note that a special double arrow is used to emphasize the reversible nature of the reaction.

For this elementary process, rate laws for the forward and reverse reactions may be derived directly from the reaction stoichiometry:

As the reaction begins (**t** = 0), the concentration of the N~2~O~4~ reactant is finite and that of the NO~2~ product is zero, so the forward reaction proceeds at a finite rate while the reverse reaction rate is zero. As time passes, N~2~O~4~ is consumed and its concentration falls, while NO~2~ is produced and its concentration increases ([↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_equilibrium)**b**). The decreasing concentration of the reactant slows the forward reaction rate, and the increasing product concentration speeds the reverse reaction rate ([↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_equilibrium)**c**). This process continues until **the forward and reverse reaction rates become equal**, at which time the reaction has reached equilibrium, as characterized by constant concentrations of its reactants and products (shaded areas of [↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_equilibrium)**b** and [↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_equilibrium)**c**). It’s important to emphasize that chemical equilibria are dynamic; a reaction at equilibrium has not “stopped,” but is proceeding in the forward and reverse directions at the same rate. This dynamic nature is essential to understanding equilibrium behavior as discussed in this and subsequent chapters of the text.

Physical changes, such as phase transitions, are also reversible and may establish equilibria. This concept was introduced in another chapter of this text through discussion of the vapor pressure of a condensed phase (liquid or solid). As one example, consider the vaporization of bromine:

When liquid bromine is added to an otherwise empty container and the container is sealed, the forward process depicted above (vaporization) will commence and continue at a roughly constant rate as long as the exposed surface area of the liquid and its temperature remain constant. As increasing amounts of gaseous bromine are produced, the rate of the reverse process (condensation) will increase until it equals the rate of vaporization and equilibrium is established. A photograph showing this phase transition equilibrium is provided in [↗](#CNX_Chem_13_01_bromine).
